Well, that's fine.
I can concentrate on you.
So the new building and the bit of the old building, which it joins up with, is really divided between the library and the exhibition.
That's the Mappamundi and Chained Library exhibition is its full title, which is all along the ground floor, and that contains the Mappamundi and the Chained Library, which is really the history of the library frozen at 1840, approximately.
um which i'll show you all that part later but um that's all on the ground floor for the general public but this class on the upper floor is for readers only but this is where anyone who's working on any part of the collection comes to read so generally speaking what what kinds of readers do you get well all sorts because our collection although small is very varied so the lady who's working there now for instance is doing local history on um one of the local villages and using
some of the old documents that we have, because although we only have the records of the cathedral, that does encompass quite a lot of local material as well, because especially in the Middle Ages, the cathedral was a great landowner.
You're familiar with cathedrals, aren't you?
So I can use terms like Dean and chapter, and you'll know what I mean.
But we also, as you see, still have a modern working library, so we have people using the modern theological collection as well.
anyone doing any sort of various sort of historical studies.
So our readers are not many, but they're various, like the collections.
And the great thing about Hertford Cathedral Library, I think, is really its continuity, I mean, compared to other things.
It's never been very large.
I mean, it was a respectable size in the Middle Ages, but unlike most other cathedral libraries, it hasn't ever suffered any great disasters in terms of loss of stock.
So...
Our proud boast is that we've had a working theological library here since the 12th century, more or less, continuously, I mean, with various variations.
So our collections, although it's small, as I said, but we do have books from every period.
How did you manage to survive the dissolution?
Well, of course, we were a secular cathedral.
We were not monastic.
So that's an important distinction.
You know about this?
Well, certainly the cathedrals
were not attached to monasteries.
They were run by bodies of secular canons.
So there was nothing to be dissolved.
So we didn't, in fact, lose anything by the dissolution.
In fact, ironically, we gained, because one of the commissioners involved in the dissolution in this area was actually an antiquary and collected a lot of manuscripts from other collections, which she later passed on to the cathedral library.
And who was Edmund?
Sir John Price, which is usually spelt P-R-I-S-E.
He was quite a...
I thought you were going to say Robert Cotton, but he came with just a bit afterwards.
Oh, yes, not the same.
He wasn't quite in that league.
So we have a lot of manuscripts from Gloucester, St.
Peter's Abbey, Gloucester, which is now Gloucester Cathedral, and Simon Sester, and various other monastic establishments roundabout.
So the dissolution was not a problem.
The Civil War should have been, but we seem to have survived that pretty well as well.
I think the city was besieged
um during the civil war but i think there was some protection of uh and the city lined up with the royalists or with the uh with the royalists i think i'm not an expert i haven't really done that but you can find that of course but anyway we've been very lucky in surviving things like that and and even surviving major sales in the 19th and 20th century which is which well vermont and mundy was a recent uh
yes we couldn't even get rid of that thank goodness well it's uh well thanks to all of that we do hire a building which is the main thing the building has done as far as from the library history point of view is that it's enabled us to bring all the chain library together it had been um actually moved from the lady chapel where it was originally in 1841 and had never been all together again in one place until 1996 so that was
That was the main achievement.
Could you tell us just a little bit about the Chained Library, the history?
I know that you're writing this history, and I don't mean to get it to a great deal.
Well, no, I was trying to think what things I could... Well, how long has there been a Chained Library?
Well, the present Chained Library was begun in 1611.
There was a library before which was presumably Chained, but nothing of the furniture survives of that.
except possibly we think some of the benches might have been from the older library but that was the first library rule was um something sort of on this level but further north it was over the west walk of the cloister nothing of the medieval west walk of this cloister remains but that's where the first library was outside the window um that was only sometime in the 15th century we have no precise dates for that but as with so many other um
libraries, institutions in general, and the first library room doesn't appear until late 14th or 15th century.
Certainly true of cathedrals.
Who generally were the readers, would you say?
That's a very interesting question.
It's very hard to identify, really.
I mean, basically, it was and still is a private library belonging to the dean and canons.
Obviously, their guests and friends used it as well.
I think cathedral libraries have always been
a bit more accessible to the public than, say, the university college libraries, I would think.
There's not a lot of evidence, really, until one gets to borrowing registers, which don't really survive before the 18th century, and there's very little of that.
That would be fascinating.
I mean, one can make sort of an educated guess, but certainly I think that the Dean and Chapter would have made it available
over most of its history to legitimate scholars, as we still do, really.
But that would have been a fairly small amount of people.
But it certainly was used by more than just the clergy.
But accessibility probably explains the chains.
Oh, well, yes.
Whoever was using it, that was considered a very necessary form of security.
not that they didn't trust well i suppose you know books walk very easily as we don't know and i'm dead even in the middle ages as we also know and of course we're so much more um rare and valuable uh we were up at durham yesterday oh yeah and they've never they've never been chained and i i asked uh no i don't know i'm i don't know enough about
as I should.
I haven't been concentrating on the monastic cathedrals.
Well, I asked the question, and he said, well, we're different, he said, because we really didn't.
These books were really for the exclusive use of the brothers.
Yes, this is why another way was monastic cathedrals are a bit different, but secular cathedrals were a bit more spoken as well.
So you undoubtedly had a greater concern for security, it would seem to me.
Yes, that's probably very true.
Yes, I haven't made enough of a study of the monastic cathedrals, but they certainly would be different, because the way they
You know, the monks used books were different as well.
I mean, they were compelled to read them and to write them, of course, which we didn't have a scriptorium here either.
So there's never been a scriptorium here?
No, although it does seem that some books were sort of made locally or made, you know, for the cathedral.
You're anticipating my questions.
Sorry.
No, that's great.
The history of the medieval library
It's been very welcome in the introduction today.
I don't know if you've come across it at all.
It's called Miners and Thompson.
Professor Thompson was really the main author of it.
He'd also done something similar for Lincoln, where I was before.
I don't know if Lincoln was on your list of places.
It has a very fine Wren library for everybody.
What kind of library?
Christopher Wren.
Oh, Christopher Wren.
But he does a very good...
The introduction is the best history of the medieval library to date.
Is this book in print?
Oh yes, but it's rather expensive.
Is it for sale here?
Yes, but it's £100 now.
But I could photocopy the
just the pages of the introduction for you, if that would be of use.
I'd charge you for the photocopies, as I couldn't say.
I wouldn't have expected you to want to, because the main bulk of it is, I mean, it's got some quite nice illustrations as well, but the main bulk of it is... But is it a catalogue of the library?
Just of the medieval manuscripts.
So we have 229 medieval manuscripts, which is, I think, the second
after Lincoln for a secular cathedral in the number of manuscripts that survive.
So that's quite useful history of the medieval library.
And I'm not presuming, you know, I shall more or less tracey that.
I'm not presuming to try and pretend I know any more than Professor Thompson does about that.
And when was this book published?
1993.
It's quite recent.
Yes.
Although it's really, I've been very privileged to be here.
It's a very...
exciting time, you know, because this was such an important thing to do.
There's so much more now we know about the manuscript and about history of the libraries.
Well, because of the book, we now know more, yes.
But anyway, so that's, I'll do that before you go.
That'd be great, excellent.
Charge 20p a sheet.
Whatever, whatever.
The only other thing that we actually sell, which I haven't got available here because it's
exhibition is really the commercial side of the enterprise is a little guide that i wrote just about the chain library which i think i think i brought that oh the pink one i brought four things already downstairs oh well done oh you have you mean in in yes right here um the just pink one that yes um so that that's the only thing that actually sells specifically on the library although it does cover you know a lot of the history so that that's probably but it's not really a sort of i mean it's just a sort of
drawn from other things, and I haven't... It'll already be cited in my pocket.
I'm sorry, I haven't got the better thing available yet.
Oh, well, Mr. Harbour, who's our exhibition's manager, is also very artistically designed that.
Very nice.
But you haven't actually been into the Chains Library.
No, no, no.
We were here a few minutes early, so we went and did some shopping.
But that probably covers, you know,
as much of the history as you need, in a way.
I don't know.
But obviously... I would also like to get a copy of the copyright page and the title page as well, so I can cite this?
Yes, of course.
Yes, I'll do that in a minute.
And if you're... The thing I...
These are now, I'll just print, because they were overtaken by the events of the museum.
This was done by my predecessor, Miss Morgan and her father, but I think that can really... Is it something we can... I can't give you that.
And the short guide, I think, probably doesn't add anything.
That's just a photocopy anyway, but that was the short guide, which I think probably doesn't add anything in.
Thank you.
Great.
So, if I can just pick your brains a little bit about the history that you're writing, so what are you concentrating on?
On people?
Oh, well, everything.
I mean, as you know, it's very difficult with libraries, because there are so many different facets, you know, I'm sort of, because we have such a short time,
Not time, but word limit.
I've only got 5,000 more hours to do 1,200 years of history.
So I think we have to do it chronologically, but of course within each period you have to consider acquisition, content, usage, finance, and housing and furnishings.
I think those are the chief headings I'm thinking of.
Administration, of course, and catalogs and things like that.
And of course there are varied amounts of evidence for each thing in each period.
It's always a difficult thing, right, in the institutional library that way, isn't it?
There's just so many... Oh, it's too much.
And just, well, and you have to sort of... I mean, we have quite a number of documents relating to the first building of the chained presses.
That's quite well documented.
But then there were centuries in which there was nothing about what was happening at all.
So it's, you know, the usual sort of thing.
Is this just about, I know that Broadly has some chained books, but they are not original, I mean, they brought these in after, they really did suffer in the dissolution.
Yeah.
Is this, I would say that this is probably the only working chained library in... Certainly the largest surviving is what we see.
The largest surviving in the world.
All its chains in the world.
I think I can say the world, but certainly in Britain.
And what are some of the others that exist?
Well, there are more sort of small parish libraries that survive, like Franklin, and also in Terreford, which we now have in our exhibition as well.
I've seen a very long story.
My mind's gone blank.
Anyway, there are a few.
And some of the cathedral libraries, Wells, still have a few of its chains left.
And the body, as you said, has a few.
Even at Hereford, during the period when the cases were dismantled from the Lady Chapel, that was the most disruptive period, and some of the chains were taken off, but they were put on again later on.
So they are the same chains and the same books, but they have been taken off and put on again.
But we still think it's counted as a genuine survival.
You mentioned earlier when we started that you described this chained library as frozen in time at 1840.
Why is that date so significant?
Well, that's about 1840.
It was 1841 that the library was moved out of the Lady Chapel.
And since then it's never really been the same again.
And no books have been added to the chained presses since then.
That's the main thing.
So although it was sort of reconstructed,
No books were chained after that date.
They went on being chained right up into the early 19th century here, which is very unusual.
Amazing.
All the 19th century folio public record office commission reports are chained, just in the old manner.
So it's almost like the Peeps Library in that you say nothing has been added and nothing has been removed, so it is a tiny capsule of a library.
Well, that's sort of, but we do also understand it still is a working library and things are still used.
With the chains?
Readers have to...?
Well, no, we have to.
Nowadays, of course, it can't be a reading room because it's open to the public.
So, sadly, it's not a library in the same sense anymore.
But if people want to use the books, we have to unchain them, and they use them up in the reading room here.
But they have to use them with the chains attached, I'm afraid.
They do.
Which is a great use.
The chains are terribly bad for the books, of course.
A great deal of charm in that, though.
Well, yes, because you need at least three hands wanting to use the chains.
But, yes, that's more or less.
That's why the date 1841 is significant.
In fact, things were, because at first, when it was put back together again, partly, in 1855, it was not put together accurately, so a lot of things weren't in their right places, and books that were added after that time were put on the same shelves, even though they weren't chained.
But after the major restoration by Canon Streeter, which was 1930, it's all in the books, even though... That's when he sort of...
restored the cases to how they used to be and the books to the right order that they have been in prior to 1841 and there was a catalogue that that gave him the key to that yes we haven't anything any catalog earlier than approximately 1718 sadly and then there are two or three more from the 18th century but um after that there isn't really another catalog till the end of the 19th century which includes all you know what was in the modern edition so
Really, we've not been very good on cataloging, I'm afraid.
But we have this thick clutch from the 18th century, which are the ones that... And how essentially were they catalogued?
By subject, by... You mean catalogued or arranged?
Either or.
Well, yes.
The first alphabetical catalogue by author isn't until the late 18th century.
The earlier ones are shelf lists, really.
And that's how the books were arranged as well.
I think this is fairly standard, too, that on each side of a bookcase,
would have a subject attached to it and then there seems to have been an attempt initially to arrange books alphabetically by author within the bay but obviously that couldn't be kept up when you're having a fixed location system so it you know because every book has
was common, has its own fixification.
Its own particular shelf number, so it always has to stay in that position of the shelf.
Was the library originally constructed to allow optimum light, sunshine?
No, it couldn't be.
Theoretically, that style of library should have had windows in between the bays so that the light would run.
It couldn't be, because it was put in the Lady Chapel.
I don't know if we've been in the cathedral yet.
Do have a look, because it's a wonderful little Gothic gem.
It's beautiful now.
And actually, probably having the library in it, I think he probably has to preserve some of the paintings on the tomb in there, which has been served very well.
Where those tombs are on the right, that's where the library was?
No, I've got the question, but it's right at the east end, anyway.
So that's the far end of the cathedral.
And it really is an exquisite little chapter.
It's very hard to imagine that it was a library for 250 years.
But because of, you know, the cases just went in there, so the lighting can't have been very good.
I'd like to see that before we go where the library was.
It's very hard to imagine.
I think if you look at the, in the book, there's the only actual visual evidence we have for what it looked like in there.
I think I've got that just to show you.
But this is the thing to sort of hold up when you're actually in the Lady Chapel.
It's a terribly bad drawing.
But this shows, these are the chain presses.
So you have to imagine looking, you can recognise the Lady Chapel from that.
Is that period drawing?
That's shortly before, well it says circa 1840, shortly before it was... That's something that's here?
Yes.
If when my book is published and we wanted to purchase a copy of that, and of course the paper writes to reproduce that, we could do that?
Yes, certainly.
Yes, we have the negative to that.
I think it was only discovered not terribly long ago.
That would be wonderful.
It's a very bad drawing, but it's the only visual representation we have.
But it's wonderful.
One thing that would be nice to do in the exhibition is really have a better reconstruction of what it would have looked like.
That's great.
The scale is terrible, because there seems to be a...
someone meant to be a person walking up there, and if he's really that high, he's about three foot high.
Do you excuse me, I'm sorry.
I want to go back to an earlier, because Connie and I were just, we're still a bit
unclear as to the distinction between a secular cathedral and a... What is it?
A secular and monastic.
Well, a monastic cathedral, obviously, was also a monastery.
But a secular cathedral was run by a body of secular canons.
It's a confusing term because secular just means non-monastic.
They were still clergy, obviously, but they weren't bound by rule or bound to live and be restricted to the house.
The secular canons were in fact quite sort of active in the world and travelled about quite a lot.
But when the dissolution came in 1536, I guess, whatever that was, 1536-38, not only did they dissolve the monasteries, but they made the Church of England the... Yes, but it didn't really affect the secular cathedrals.
They went on much as before, which is why the secular cathedrals came to be called cathedrals of the old foundation, meaning that they carried on with their medieval statues.
As we still do.
But was it of a Catholic Church still?
No, it was the Reformed Church of England, yes.
But, I mean, we still have bishops, you know.
But really, in essence, apart from now being Protestant, the way the cathedral is run has not essentially changed in many ways since the Middle Ages.
I mean, the statutes have been reformed from time to time, but just sort of added to what was there before.
But that's why we are known as cathedrals of the old foundation.
But the monastic cathedrals, obviously the monasteries were dissolved,
And they were re-founded on a very similar basis to the secular cathedrals, with a dean and chapter, but no longer monks.
So they became known as cathedrals of the new foundation, which is very confusing.
Did you know this?
I didn't know that.
It is very complicated.
In fact, it's all going to change again very shortly, because there's a new cathedrals measuring, which is going to make all cathedrals the same anyway, and they're all going to be quite different and have much more lay representation.
What's about to happen is the biggest change since the dissolution.
Everything's going to be different.
It's a very complicated thing.
Of all the ancient cathedrals, it's about half each.
Durham was monastic, obviously.
York wasn't.
Canterbury was.
Hereford and Lincoln
our secular, our Exeter, Chichester, Wells, Litchfield.
The individual community could get together and support the cathedral.
Yes.
And determine it more.
Yes, which is still, it's basically, we call it the Dean and Chapter, which is basically the dean in the few, a handful of residential canons, who usually have, the same offices tend to occur, presenter, chartered for music, and chancellor, chartered for books and learning.
treasurer, obviously, and the archdeacon, which is really a diocesan official, but they tended to be on the chapter as well.
So that's what is meant by the chapter.
But there is also the greater chapter, which includes all the presentaries, and they are the ones who sit in the stalls in the choir, which have their own names.
And the presents
represented actual land or means of finance which actually it is quite complicated the year that the chaining was mandated i guess well yes but that still relates to the um
medieval library so we don't know anything really about whether we think they we think they should certainly were supposed to be chained but um and there is evidence from a few of the surviving books that you know they were evidence of chain staples on the top or bottom of the cover um but we just have no other evidence really so that's formalized that formalized it in other words well it is just trying to tighten things up really the the new status and our printed books
as well as manuscripts represented?
Oh, yes.
The manuscripts only cover two single sides of a bay.
There are mainly double presses or bookcases, and one side we call a bay.
So there are two bays that have manuscripts, and the rest are all early printed books.
And canabula?
Yes, we have about 50-odd canabula, yes.
And what would you say are the jewels of the collection?
Oh, well, the Hereford Gospels is our great treasure.
I could probably actually show you those.
I mean, the problem I have is that I can't really show you anything, actual books in the Chained Library, I'm afraid, because obviously it's open to the public.
But I could take you down to our strong room where there are all our unchanged rare books and all the archives.
We would greatly enjoy that, and it would get into the book.
Yes, I know.
I mean, this is what it's...
And I promise to keep my pen in my jacket.
So that's, I mean, all the medieval manuscripts are obviously all very special.
But the Hereford Gospels... That's famous, of course.
Very famous.
The House of Gospels.
Are you part of them?
They're not as famous as the Book of People.
I do believe there was a facsimile printed of it.
No, sadly not yet.
It's very modest by the standards of the 8th century.
And it's very modest by the, you know, compared to things like the New Testament Gospels and the Book of Clothes, but it's the same sort of period.
It's illuminated?
There are three, just the first page of each Gospel was illuminated, and three of them survived.
St.
Luke has gone missing.
The other three survive.
It's quite modest, but it is the oldest thing in the cathedral, since we haven't any Roman remains.
It's older than any part of the fabric.
Eighth century.
It's older than the cathedral, and the book survives.
Yes, it's a bit of a mystery, because the cathedral was burnt down in 1055.
The tradition is that these gospels were given by the last book, Monfaxon Bishop, Bishop Battleston, who died in 1056.
And he's traditionally supposed to have given this book to the cathedral.
How it survived, you know, the destruction of the cathedral in 1055, we don't know, but it's certainly a good deal older than anything else that we have.
And it's just been there, sitting on the shelves, and it was rebounded in the 17th century very badly, which is sad, and then had a chain put on it, of course.
It's 1,200 years old.
Yeah.
So that's where the history of the library starts, really.
we don't know of anything before then of course there would have been there was a saxon cathedral on this site but again we know nothing about it really but um anyway now yes and how many presses are there in the chain library um six double and two single so that's 14 bays
It's probably in here too, I'm sure.
I hope so, yes.
And I think I did actually list the... because the headings survive partly on the base themselves and partly in the catalogs, just in the different subject areas.
So that's just... And they're now identified by letters, which is confusing.
The letters don't actually mean anything, they're just letters to identify the different base.
But that was a mid-18th century innovation.
Before that, they were just numbered.
Well, Robert Patton used the Roman emperors, which had made no chronological sense at all, but it was wonderful.
The contents are... I mean, basically, it's always been a theological library primarily, including, obviously, biblical commentaries and church history and quite a lot of lore, certainly in the Middle Ages.
but um yes and since in from the 17th century there's been a certain amount of of general scholarly things histories and travel a bit but um really not very much we aren't it's not a very wide-ranging collection in terms of content really but it's difficult to summarize that's also good and just i think you told us and i'm sure it's in here but just for my case
the number of volumes in the chain library uh in the chain library uh we say about 1500 that's including the 229 meta-eva manuscripts but we have all together about 3 000 books printed before 1801 which is still the working definition of a rare book and many of those were given after uh the chain library seems to be
It used to have chains attached to it, so they're all now in our strong room.
I guess one more question before we walk about.
Is the Mappamundi part of your purview as well?
Yes and no.
It's a bit tentative.
I hope I've explained in the book as well, but all the treasures of the Chained Library and the rare books and the Mappamundi now belong to something new called the Mappamundi Trust, which is really a charity.
This is all part of the set-up after this.
So, insofar as it owns an awful lot of our treasures, it's not really a library item as such, although it has been in the library at various points in its past, but it's never been sort of catalogued as a library item.
obviously censoring of the exhibition now but the exhibition is sort of a separate department from the library we're both departments of the cathedral it's a bit complicated but it is interesting though your chained library continues to be a working library well we say that as i said it's not really well you bring it up here i mean the books are still used it's not used as a reading room anymore that's the sad thing but you can't have everything so we like i mean we'll have to think that i mean it's a way of accommodating
the old with the new and the modern needs of the general public who want to come and view the treasures with the continuing needs of people who want to actually have access to the books.
So the building was designed to solve that problem but it is a real problem obviously in historic life as you probably find.
It's wonderful that you've seen books
satisfy both needs well theoretically i mean we've had a lot of we're very proud of the building itself and it's won all sorts of awards and things you know but we've had a lot of problems with the systems of course but that's quite normal and this isn't finished i should have said that straight away that the idea is that there will be shelving cutting off this area into three bits with an office area on either side and then in the middle there will be a sort of extension of the working library which means that we can bring back a lot more of our books just in store
So that's just been hanging over.
We're hoping it'll happen.
It's now due to happen the end of May, I think.
So that's why this place is a bit of a, well, it's obviously our working area, but it is a bit of a mess.
But this is the Dean Lee Library, which was done in 1897, almost exactly 100 years before this new bit.
And that was meant to house the Chained Library as they then knew about it.
That was housed up here.
But that was pre the restoration by Stritia and after Stritia's restoration.
There was no room for it all here anymore.
So half of it went back up to the room where it was on display.
It was the old Newman room above the North Lancet.
And that's where half of it was on display to the public.
So, you know, for the last 60 odd years,
the problem that has been solved by having the library in two places and half the changed library with the bit that was available to tourists and half of the wedding house I'm afraid that physically it's just complicated with history I'm sorry I hope that if you can work it out specifically had I had it before I would have read it before we came I'm delighted we discovered it down below and then just briefly and I'm sure that this is answered in here too
Do we know how the cathedral got the map on Monday?
No, basically.
There's no record of it before the 17th century.
There are various suggestions, but it is assumed that it's been here since the Middle Ages, and since shortly after, or even immediately after its actual creation.
But there's a lot of speculation and arguments about that.
One of these wonderful mysteries.
Yes, and people have all sorts of different theories.
If you wanted to see that, we're trying to organise a big conference next year, 1999.
There's going to be an international Mahamundi conference, because there's been so much interest in it generated since it's been in the news.
It's amazing how much interest there is, really.
But there's an awful lot that's uncertain about it, and always will be, of course.
So that, anyway.
That's great.
All right, thank you.
Actually, that's a mystery.
I was rather astonished when I read the stone.
Oh, well, but he's since he's come out modernity.
His wife, Sabine, came on that occasion instead.
And he's since he's married then, he's come out wonderfully.
And when the Queen opened the building and presented it over, there's a book and everything.
But you see there, this is all this great mystery.
He's there surrounded.
And that really means a knighthood.
So he should have been a sir, but he couldn't be a sir because he wasn't a British citizen.
But now that he's become a British citizen, he's become a sir.
So he's now a sir of the... I don't think it's what I'm saying for Jason or for Paul.
I think he goes by Paul Getty, actually.
Anyway, we just don't think he's the best thing.
He's quite a wonderful good man, too.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, it was very humiliating when...
and his secretary and his assistant came round and he showed them all our specialties.
Oh yes, Mr Gettys, he's got one of those.
That's three hours.
Are they natives that are very frequently?
I'm not sure when you're a producer.
Excuse me.
Do you have to do much of something wrong?
No.
Well, it's really difficult to... If I'm just going to walk with me.
The lighting is too hot to see it.
She's awake.
I think all about here we left my side.
We think that this is a book chest, although the chapters rather than the archive think it was a great chest for the archive, but it's certainly a very fine 14th century chest.
So either books are archived.
But you see the locks are all numbered.
There are three different keys, which would be in the possession of a different person.
So you couldn't have anyone... Very early... How is the expression?
I forget the phrase that you used, but checks on each other.
So you have three different keys.
Well, exactly.
One person can't open, and every other person's compartmentalizing.
The model was called the cloister, so it's just... This is beautiful.
It's been restored.
Well, it was first restored in the late 1890s, 1899s.
Different people were responsible for paying for different days, or it was restored on their behalf.
And that was when the Dean, you know, shortly after the Dean Lee Library was built, the 19th century library, so it was an association with that.
So this might be another book chest?
Yes, again, probably a book chest.
And this is to carry it?
It's a mobile library, yes.
Oh, that's wonderful.
There's a bit of a photograph, we couldn't find a better one than showing the two birds, and it's 1930s carrying it, so we just left that in.
And this actually, although it uses some of the early wood from the changed lives, it's only a mock-up.
It's to give people the ability to see how the changed lives would work.
The idea is to distract them from wanting to handle the real things.
We did want to have a real book as well.
But it was designed based on an actual book.
Just to give you an idea of how it really should be that book.
Is this an original... This end is actually possibly a bit of woodwork.
You can see there's been some paving on the top, but the rest of it is all... You can see it's a bit older.
We did have a kind of a catalogue.
That's right.
And this is actually the list of the actual... I mean, it is done by a political for the exhibition, but it does actually list the actual manuscripts that were in case P. But you see this is the principle of how the claiming works.
And the foreword displays answers.
And this lock is to... Yes, I'm sorry I can't demonstrate it.
This one wouldn't work anyway, but there is a key that we have that unlocks that.
That was only when you're actually taking books off or adding them.
It releases the two hats which came to the top of the bottom, and that releases the barge.
This one is actually chained to the bottom bar, but you can't see so much.
But one end of the chain went along the bars, and the other end is attached to the book.
Yes, I would just wish...
I'm just talking about libraries, not the map at the moment.
You're very welcome to listen if you want.
This is the all-paint chain library which I mentioned, which was the one
at the Church of All Saints, which is along the spire, you can just see the spires at the end of all of this.
And that is written by Dr. Brewster, the gentleman of the portrait, who is a parishioner of All Saints Parish, and a great book collector.
And this is not something like you just gave the All Saints, his theological books, basically, and they're still full of much more interesting things than we have in the main chains, aren't we?
It's a nice contrast because they're much more person-sized books, there's much more quarters and octavos than you'd have in the main chain library.
and also much more than used as well.
So it's just a nice contrast.
It's a private library as compared to... And this is all authentic fitting furniture, right?
Well, I'm not certain.
I wouldn't like to comment.
I think the tables are probably later, but I think certainly most of the wood in the actual cases, but those tables look later to me, but I haven't heard at all further to comment on them, so I wouldn't like to...
So how many of the chained presses did you move down here?
Into this space?
Into this space, sorry.
Yes.
Is that all the chain suppressors that are here?
That is the All Saints chain line.
Oh, that's the All Saints?
Yes.
So that's all of it.
I see.
I mean, the All Saints.
I get it.
Okay.
I see.
So that's just an hors d'oeuvre.
So, how do you do that on that thing?
Just do it.
Okay.
Thank you.
No, that's fine.
But that's it.
Extraordinary.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
The more atmosphere it means.
And that's our most destination management.
Absolutely.
And this is the heart of the manifestation.
And as you can see they've designed the room so it's suitable for a 17th century library without actually being a pastiche.
We think it's quite beautiful in its own life without being sort of aggressively different.
It still gives me a bit of a thrill because it is the first time they've all been together again
We moved out of the Lady of Chapel in 1841.
So the Queen came up to open this two years ago?
That's right, yes.
It was rather wonderful.
She had an assembly of baling of stones in another part of the cathedral.
And then she came back to the exhibition in Italy.
different people and ended up in the chain gallery and then went out to the service in the creval and while she was at the service the masons dashed through with the stones and mounted them on the wall in time for all the distinguished guests who came after the service from building the cement was still west of the town